Problem Statement:
Company maintains employee information as employee ID, name, designation and salary. Allow
user to add, delete information of employee. Display information of particular employee. If
employee does not exist an appropriate message is displayed. If it is, then the system displays
the employee details. Use index sequential file to maintain the data.
Objectives:
1. To understand concept of file organization in data structure.
2. To understand concept of index sequential file organization.
Outcomes:
Student will be able to understand concept of file organization in data structure.
Software Requirements:
1. 64-bit Open source Linux or its derivative
2. Open Source C++ Programming tool like G++/GCC.
3. Turbo C++ compiler
Theory:-
A file is the basic entity for permanent retention of data in secondary storage devices such as
hard drives, CDs, DVDs, flash drives, and tapes. But, the problem is that the common file imposes
no structure of data storage and is not fit for high level-data processing. Files store a sequence of
data as raw data bytes.
In C++, typically a file is opened if it already exists or created as an object associated to the
stream is created. The most common stream objects in C++ are: cin, cout, cerr, and clog. These
objects are created as we include the iostream header into a program. The cin object associates
with the standard input stream, cout with the standard output stream, and cerr and clog with the
standard error stream.
File Processing: There are two indispensable headers that must be included to perform file
processing in C++: <iostream> and <fstream>. There are three important stream class templates
in the <fstream> header: the basic_ifstream for performing file input, basic_ofstream for file
output, and basic_fstream for both file input and output. .
Note that the ifstream, ofstream, and fstream objects that we often use ina C++ program is
nothing but a specialization of basic_ifstream, basic_ofstream, and basic_fstream, respectively. The
<fstream> library provides theses typedef aliases for the basic template specialization classes to
provide convenience by performing character I/O to and from files.
Sequential Files: A file created with the help of C++ standard library functions does not impose
any structure on how the data is to be persisted. However, we are able to impose structure
programmatically according to the application requirement. Suppose a minimal “payroll”
application stores an employee record in a sequential file as employee id, name of the employee,
and salary. The data obtained for each employee constitutes a record. The records are stored and
written to the file sequentially and retrieved or read from the file in the same manner.
Opening a File:Here, we have opened the file using an instance of the ofstream class using two
arguments: filename and opening mode. A file can be opened in different modes, as shown in the
following table.
File
Opening
mode
Description
ios::in Open file for reading data.
ios::out Creates file if it does not exist. All existing data is
erased from the file as new data is written into
the file.
ios::app Creates file if it does not exist. New data is
written at the end of the file without disturbing
the existing data.
ios::ate Open file for output. Data can be written
anywhere in the file, similar to append.
ios::trunc Discard file content, which is the default action
for ios::out.
ios::binary Open file in binary (non-text) mode.
There is an open function that also can be used to open a file and set the mode. This is
particularly useful when we first create an ofstream object and then open it as follows:
After creating an ofstream or ifstream object, it typically is checked whether it has successfully
opened or not. We do this with the following code:
Data processing occurs after a file has been opened successfully. The stream insertion (>>) and
extraction (<<) operators are overloaded for convenient writing and reading data to and from a
file. The file we have created is a simple text file and can be viewed by any text editor.
Closing a File:A file opened must be closed. In fact, as we invoke the close operation associated
with the ofstream or ifstream object, it invokes the destructor, which closes the file. The
operation is automatically invoked as the stream object goes out of scope. As a result, an explicit
invocation of the close function is optional, but still is good programming practice.
Conclusion: Thus we have studied and implemented concept of index sequential file
organization.
